## Chapter 6  
# Effect of the TF Preference 思考與情感偏好的效應區別

THINKING AND FEELING are rival instruments of decision. Both are reasonable and internally consistent, but each works by its own standards, Jolande Jacobi (1968) says that thinking evaluates from the viewpoint "true-false" and feeling from the viewpoint "agreeable-disagreeable." This sounds like a thinker's formulation. "Agreeable" is too pale a word for the rich personal worth of a feeling evaluation.   

The important point to recognize is that each kind of judgment has its appropriate field. To use feeling where thinking is called for can be as great a mistake as to use thinking where feeling is needed.  

Thinking is essentially impersonal. Its goal is objective truth, independent of the personality and wishes of the thinker or anoyone else. A seventeen-year-old introverted thinker, speculating on the method and purpose of the Creation, summed it up, "I don't care what the truth turns out to be -- but I want it to hang together." So slong as the problems are impersonal, like those involved in building a bridge or interpreting a statute, proposed solutions can and should be judged from the standpoint "true-false," and thinking is the better instrument.  

But the moment the subject is people instread of things or ideas -- and some voluntary cooperation from those people is needed -- the impersonal approach is less successful. People (even thinkers) do not like to be viewed impersonally and relegated to the status of "objects." Human motives are notably personal. Therefore, in the sympathetic handling of people where personal values are important, feeling is the more effective instrument.  

To hinkers, the idea of evaluating by means of feeling sounds flighty, unreliable, and uncontrolled, but thinkers are no judges of feeling. They naturally judge all feeling by their own, and theirs is relativesly undeveloped and unreliable. When feeling is well developed, it is a stable instrument for discriminating the worth of personal values, selecting as guiding stars those values that rank highest, and subordinating the lesser to the greater. When feeling is extraverted and directed upon other people, it not only recognizes their personal values but manages to convey its own.  

Thus, in teaching, in acting and the other arts, in oratory and in that humbler branch of persuasion called salesmanship, in the relations of the clergy to their congregations, in family life, in social contracts, and in any sort of counseling, it is feeling which serves as the bridge between one human being and another.  

The TF preference is the only one that shows a marked sex difference. The proportion of feeling types appears to be substantially higher among women than among men. This difference in the frequencies of the types ffor men and women has led to much generalization about the sexes. Women have been assumed to be less logical, more tenderhearted, more tactful, more social, less analytical, and more included to take things personally. All these are feeling traits. Feeling types (of either sex) will tend to have them. Thinking types (of either sex) will not. The generalization tends to pass over the women with thunking and the men with feeling, partly because types that do not fit the stereotypes have often leaned the art of protective coloration.  

The merits of the thinkers's logical approach to life are so obvious and so well known that it has not seemed neccessary to discuss them here. (They are treated in some detail in the individual descriptions of the thinking types in Chapter 9.) But it should never be assumed that thinkers have a monopoly on all worthwhile mental activity. They do not even have a monopoly on thinking. Just thinkers may attain, on occasion, a very useful supplementary development of feeling that does not interfere with their thinking judgments, so too the feeling types may sometimes enlist their thinking to find the logical reasons needed to win a thinker's acceptance of a conclusion they have already reached by way of feeling. Because the publication of a cherished piece of work, undertaken from motives of feeling and carried out intuitively, thinking may be used to check for possible flows and fallacies.  

Conventional measures of mental ability, such as intelligence tests and scholarship, show some of the very highest records belong to INFP and INFJ types, who relegate thinking to last place or next to last. The preference for thinking appears to have far less intellectual effect than the preference for intuition, even in some technical fields, such as scientific research, where its influence was expected to be most important.  

It would seem, therefore, that the mark of a thinker is not so much the possession of greater mental powers but having them run on a different track. Thinkers are at their best with the impersonal, and they are the most able to handle things that need to be done impersonally. The judge and the surgeon, for example, tend to rule out all personal considerations. One famous surgeon was so impersonal that his wife could not event focus his attention on his own children unless she took them to his office.  

Finally, thinking is not always first-class thinking, Its product is no better than the facts it started with (and they were acquired by perception of unknown quality) and no better than the logic employed. When a person who reportedly described logic as an organized way of goin wrong with confidence, he voiced the distrust of the out-and-out intuitives and the feeling types for such a cut-and-dried method of decision. When feeling types know that they value an idea or a person or a course of action, a thinker's argument designed to confute that value leaves them cold. The thinker's judgement could be wrong! Thinkers often contradict each other, each on claimming. "This is truth." The feeling type need only say, "This is valuable to me."  

The summary in Figure 26 differentiates the people in the outer columns of the Type Table from those in the middle columns. The traits mentioned are most evident in the EJ types, whose judging process is both extraverted and dominant and consequently most visible and emphatic. When the judging process is merely the auxiliary, it is subordinate to the perceptions of the dominant process and its manifestations tend to be more moderate.  

------------------
| **Thinking Types** | **Feeling Types** |
| ----- | ----- |
| Value logic above sentiment. | Value sentiment above logic. |
| Are usually impersonal, being more interested in things than in human relationships. | Are usually personal, being more interested in people than in things |
| If forced to choose between truthfulness and tactfulness, will usually be truthful. | If forced to choose between tactfulness and truthfulness, will usually be tactful. |
| Are stronger in executive ability than in the social arts. | Are stronger in the social arts than inexecutive ability. |
| Are likely to question the conclusions of other people on principle --believing them probably wrong. | Are likely to agree with those around them, thinking as other people think, believing them probably right. |
| Naturally brief and businesslike, they often seem to lack friendliness and sociability without knowing or intending it. | Naturally friendly, whether sociable or not, they find it difficult to be brief and businesslike. |
| Are usually able to organize facts and ideas into a logical sequence that states the subject, makes the necessary points, comes to a conclusion, and stops there without repetition. | Uusually find it hard to known where to start a statement or in what order to present what they have to say. May therefore ramble and repeat themselves, with more detail than a thinker wants or thinks necessary. |
| Suppress, undervalue, and ignore feeling that is incompatible with the thinking judgments. | Suppress, undervalue, and ignore thinking that is offensive to the feeling judgments. |
| Contribute to the welfare of society by the intellectual criticism of its habits, customs, and beliefs, by the exposure of wrongs, solution of problems, and the support of science and research for the enlargement of human knowledge and understanding. | Contribute to the welfare of society by their loyal support of good works and those movements, generally regarded as good by the community, which they feel correctly about and so can serve effectively. |
| Are found more often among men than women and when married to a feeling type naturally become guardian of the spouse's neglected and unreliable thinking. | Are found more often among women than men and, when married to a thinking type, frequently become guardian of the spouse's neglected and harrassed feelings. |
------------------
**Figure 26 Effect of the TF Preference**
