## Chapter 7  
# Effect of the JP Preference 判斷與感知偏好的效應區別

THE JUDGING TYPES believe that life should bewilled and decided, while the perceptive types regard life as something to be experienced and understood. Thus, judging types like to settle things, or at least to have things settled, whereas perceptive types prefer to keep their plans and opinions as open as possible so that no valulable experience or enlightement will be missed. The constrast in their lives is quite evident.  

Judgmenet is eternally comming to conclusions--with the finality the word implies. Judgment really *likes* to dispose of things, even without the spur of necessity. Frequently judging types settle not only what they are to do themselves, but what others are to do. Given a little provocation, they settle what others are to think. The person who says "What you ought to do ..." ten minutes after meeting someone new is a marked judging type.  

Less-marked judging types think to themselves what someone else ought to do, but suppress the impulse to speak out. Perceptive types do not even think it. They would rather hear about what a person is doing. Two immortal examples of perception are Kipling's Rikki-tikki-tavi, whose motto was "run and find out," and the insatiably curious Elephant's Child who went around getting spanked for asking "why?"  

Such inexhaustible interest in "what?" and "why?" does not conduce to finality. The perceptive types do not come to conslusions until they must--and sometimes not even then. Being cognizant of how many factors are involved and how much is still unknown, they are rather horrified at the eagerness of the judging types to decide a matter. The saying that "a bad decision is better than none" makes sense only to a judging typej. Perceptive types always hope that they can solve the problem simply by understanding it better, by "seeing to the bottom of it" if they are intuitives or by "seeing it from all sides" if they are sensing types. Often they can. In such cases they are hardly conscious of judgment; the solution has been latent there in the situation and they have eventually "seen" what was the thing to do.  

Of course, the perceptive types still need judgment. Their perception should be *supported* by an adequately developed judging process. Otherwise, they will drift downwind like a sailboat with its centerboard up. *It takes judgment* (either thinking or feeling will do) *to give continuity of purpose and supply a standard by which to criticize and govern one's own actions.*  

At the other extreme, judging types with insufficient perception have no "give" or cooperation in them. If they lack an adequately developed perceptive process, they will be narrow, rigid, and incapable of seeing any point of view except their own. This characteristic of the relentlessly judging individual is recognized in the word *prejudice*--a prejudgment impervious to perception.  

Furthermore, if thinking or feeling types lack preceptions of their own, they will be obliged to rely on the forms of judgment in default of content. They will accept the forms current in their environment: Thinkers will depend on the formulas and accepted principals; feeling types will adopt the attitudes of approval and disapproval. But they will apply these mechanically, with no genuine insight into the particular situation. *It takes perception* (either sensing or intuition will do) *to supply understanding, open-mindedness, and the first-hand knowledge of life needed to keep judgment itself from being blind.*  

Thus well-balanced individuals must always have perception to support their judgment, and judgment to support their perception. Tjhey will still retain their basic preference and the qualities it gives. The gifts of judgment include:    
- *System in doing things.* It is natural for a judging type to decide what is the best way of doing a thing and then consistently do it that way. The thinking process tries for the most logical method; the feeling process for hte most pleasing, suitable, or proper method.  
- *Order in possessions.* It is a judging sentiment that order is Heaven's first law. Thinking types believe in orderliness for utiliarian reasons. TJ types may have eerything inside their bureau drawers neatly classified in boxes but not concern themselves with the state of the bureau top; FJ types, more esthetically inclined, are almost certain to have the top neat, too.  
- *The planned life.* Order applied to one's activities means programs and schedules. The judging types decide in advance what they intend to accomplish, and they make careful and sometimes very long-range plans. FJs tend to have the fullest schedules because of their many social activities.  
- *Sustained effort.* Having once decided to do a thing, the judging types continue to do it. This application of willpower results in impressive accomplishments. The tortoise in the race was certainly a judging type. The hare, becuase he liked to operate in tremendous spurts, was probably an extraverted intuitive but lacked adequate judgment.  
- *Decisiveness.* Note everyone who lives in the judging attitude enjoys the actual makeing of decisions. Some simply dislike to have things remain undecided. These are more likely to be feeling types than thinkers.  
- *Exercise of authority.* The judging types want to see other people conform to their standards and are usually glad to advise them. The TJ people often have better executive and organizing abilities, but where the rules are firmly laid down, the FJs can be very good at gentle enforcement. Of 124 school administrators cited by von Fange (1961), 86 percent were J.  
- *Settled opinions.* Judging types usually know what they think about everything they consider worth thinking about.  
- *Acceptance of routine.* Acceptance of routine is put last because any marked development of intuition is apt to cancel it out, but judging types with sensing seem able to take routine more philosophically than any of the other types. Among the gifts of perception are:  
- *Spontaneity.* Spontaneity is the ability to take whole-heartedly the experience or enlightenment of the present moment, even though  some intended thing goes undone. Perceptive types believe it can be more important to go and look at a bird's nest that the children have found, or to take time out to help hunt up the answer to a question, or listen to a confidence with one's whole heart, thatn to have a meal on time.  
- *Open-mindedness.* Perception involves a certain hospitality of mind, a willingness to admit to consideration of new facts, ideas, and proposals, even though they involve the reopening of decisions or opinions. The perceptive types leave many decisions and opinions standing wide open in expectation of new information.  
- *Understanding.* Perception is applied to people in order to understand their point of view rather than to pass judgment on their actions. Parents who take the perceptive attitude with their children whenever possible will be entrusted with many more confidences than parents who have an immediate (and usually critical) opinion about everything they are told. The comparatively rare pronouncements of the perceptive parents will be accorded more respect,  because the parents will have done enough listening to appreciate the situation.<br>
A *generally* perceptive attitude is perfectly consistent with firm parental discipline. Discipline is needed to enforce the fundamentals, preferably a few fundamentals. If children observe those faithfully, they are acceptable members of society, and just like grown-ups, they are entitled to be spared a running commentary on their every act.  

- *Tolerance.* The "live and let live" attitude arises partly from reluctance to settle things for other people and partly from perceptive recognition that there can be a variety of legitimate standards. Tolerance grows dangerous only when carried to the extreme of condoning actual *lack* of standards in some essential field.  
- *Curiosity.* One of the liveliest gifts of the perceptive types is the expectation that what they do not yet know will be interesting. Curiosity leads them into many byways of knowledge and experience and into amassing astonishing stores of information. It also wards off boredom, as it finds something of interest in almost any situation.  
- *Zest for experience.* Another expectation of the perceptives is that what they have not yet done is going to be interesting. They may refuse a new experience on grounds of taste or principle or in favor of a more compelling attraction, but seldom because it is "not worth doing," as the judging types say.  
- *Adaptability.* The perceptive handles a difficulty by adapting the available means for the achievement of the essential ends. One very perceptive woman cherishes a compliment from her judging husband on how effectively she reassembles the fragments of a situation when something unforeseen upsets all the existing arrangements. Because she is never tied to the old plan, she is free to improvise a new one to meet the altered conditions, and enjoys doint it.   

In considering the qualities listed above, readers may have difficulty evaluating their own JP preference because of an inconsistency between what they feel they should do, what they actually do, and what they naturally tend to do. It is the natural tendency that reveals the basic preference. A person's idea of what is right may be an acquired ideal, borrowed from another type, and the person's actual behavior may reflect a somewhat uncongenial good habit learned from parents or accepted because of the person's own dogged efforts.  

It is important, especially for introverts, to remember that the JP preference applies to a person's customary attitude toward the outer world. What shows in most causal contracts with other people (and governs the JP index on the Type Indicator) is the extraverted process, the one usually relied on for the conduct of outer life. For extraverts, it is the same as the dominant process; for introverts it is not.  

Thus, in an introvert the preference for the judging attitude in outer matters may be quite evident, even obvious, but it not final. The judging process used in the outer world is actually subordinate to the introverted dominant process (which is a perceptive one) and operates subject to the requirements of that favorite perceptive process. For example, if thinking is the extraverted process, it will conduct things with logic and decisiveness, but logic will not be allowed to hamper the inner perception.  

Similarly, in an introvert whose preference for the perceptive attitude is ordinarily obvious, this perceptiveness is actually subordinate to an introverted judging process (thinking or feeling) and must serve the ultimate values and principles determined by the judging process. A very perceptive introvert student was surprised when she was voted "most decisive" in her high school class. The vote was taken soon after several issues had arisen that touched feeling values she held fundamental.  Her inner certainty had overruled her habitual outer perceptiveness, and she had defended her position on all the issues.  

Some differences resulting from the JP preference are compared in Figure 27. In general, these characteristics differentiate extraverts in the bottom row of the Type Table from those in the third row. They also differentiate introverts in the top row from those in the second row, with certain exceptions due to the special role of the introvert's dominant process.  

------------------
| **Judging Types** | **Perceptive Types** |
| ----- | ----- |
| Are more decisive than curous. | Are more curious than decisive. |
| Live according to plans, standards, and customs not easily or lightly set aside, to which the situation of the moment must, if possible, be made to conform. | Live according to the situation of the moment and adjust themselves easily to the accidental and the unexpected. |
| Make a very definite choice among life's possibilities, but may not appreciate or utilize unplanned, unexpected, and incidental happenings. | Are frequently masterful in their handling of the unplanned, unexpected, and incidental, but may not make an effective choice among life's possibilities. |
| Being rational, they depend on reasoned judgments, their own or borrowed from someone else, to protect them from unnecessary undesirable experiences. | Being empirical, they depend on their readiness for anything and everything to bring them a constant flow of new experience--much more thant they can digest or use. |
| Like to have matters settled and decided as promptly as possible, so that they will know what is going to happen and can plan for it and be prepared for it. | Like to keep decisions open as long as possible before doing anything irrevocable, because they don't know nearly enough about it yet. |
| Think or feel that they know what other people ought to do about almost everything, and are not averse to telling them. | Know what other people are doing, and are interested to see how it comes out. |
| Take real pleasure in getting something finished, out of the way, and off their minds. | Take great pleasure in starting something new, until the newness wears off. |
| Are inclined to regard the perceptive types as aimless drifters | Are inclined to regard the judging types as only half alive. |
| Aim to be right. | Aim to miss nothing. |
| Are self-regimented, purposeful, and exacting. | Are flexible, adaptable, and tolerant. |
------------------
**Figure 27 Effect of the JP Preference**
