# The Shadow Side 人格陰影區
The descriptions are designed to apply to each type at its best, as examplified by normal, well-balanced, well-adjusted, happy, and effective people. So the basic description assumes good development both the dominant and auxiliary processes. Actually the types come in widely different states of development. If the auxiliary process is undeveloped, the person will lack balance between judgment and perception, and also between extraversion and introversion. If the dominant process is also undeveloped, there will not be much left of the type except its weaknesses.  

Well-developed or not, everyone has a shadowside. Just as the concious personality is the product of the best-developed processes, the shadow is the product of the least-developed processes, the shadow is the product of the least-developed part, which a person rejects and disowns. The shadow uses relatively childish and primitive kinds of judgment and perception, not intentionally in the service of conscious aims, but all on its own in an escape from the conscious personality and in defiance of conscious standards.  

The results are usually regrettable. Acts of which a person says afterwards, "I dont' know how I came to do that. I didn't mean to!" are usually the work of the shadow, and so are other regrettable things that a person may not even be aware of having done. The irasicible Professor Henry Higgins insisted that he was "a very quiet man."  

It is well to understand the shadow, as it explains some curious contraditions in people. If a person's apparent preferences indicate a given type, yet he or she has behaved in a way wholly alien to the type in question, consider the quality of the act. If it was inferior to the person's usual standard, there may have been a shadow at work.  

A person's type is the product of conscious orientation to life: habitual, purposeful ways of using one's mind -- habitual because they seem good and interesting and trustworthy. The shadow is something that happens when a person isn't looking.  

Some introverts pay so little conscious attention to extraverting that they archieve little or no development of their extraverted auxiliary process. Their extraversion will be largely unconscious and their shadow processes may be more apparent than their conscious personalities. A woman completing the Type Indicator for her extremely introverted ISFJ husband as she sees him, may make him an ISTJ, missing the feeling he does not express, and reporting instead the unconscious, inferior, and critical thinking of his shadow side.  
